=======================================
Requirements for new Shogi game format
=======================================
Thursday, March 27, 2008
Fat Bold Cyclop

There seems to be great need for a single computer standard for
exchanging Shogi games data.

There has been ongoing debate on discussion board (shogi-l) for years
now.

Although the discussion tends to be difficult (like the never ending
dillema "which came first, the chicken or the egg") but the point is
quite simple. After scanning the post you notice that there are just a
few simple requirements to be fulfilled.

I try to collect them here. The standard should let for the following
features:

  1. Storing multiple games in one file.

  2. Providing game information (type of the game, players, date, event,
     outcome, ...) in the way that any shogi software could correctly
     interpret it.

  3. Allowing to store variants.

  4. Allowing to store comments in different languages.

  5. Allowing to embed multimedia contents (board markups, pictures,
     sounds, movies) in the comments.

Except for the last (embedding multimedia) I consider them to be the
core features. They have to be included into the specification. In my
opinion no matter if the standard is totally new or if it's based on
some existing format (Simple Game Format, Portable Shogi Notation, KIF)
it needs to address the problems mentioned above.

By the way, they seem to be easy to implement:

Ad 1) If the single game has concise and well defined description, the
      games are easily distinguishable/separable. Even if it is not the
      case, some game separator could be introduced.

Ad 2) The information could be provided in key/value pairs (let's not 
      bother about their form now), for example sente:Sato Yasumitsu or
      [sente "Sato Yasumitsu"].

We would have to agree on the standard set of tags (sente, gote, event,
etc.). The less, the better. The standard, to be flexible and extensible,
would state that other tags are allowed but are not given any special
meaning. This way if one program needs to add some information that
matters only to it, it uses his own tag without any side effects on
other programs.

Ad 3) There are many possibilities here. SGF and PSN uses tree-like text
      data structure for example. I could think of few more solutions
      but the actual implementation doesn't really matter. Ideally, the
      structure should be easy for the machines to decode but still easy
      enough for humans to read it.

Ad 4) For comments we should opt for standard Unicode encoding like
      UTF-8.

Ad 5) I have some reservations about number 5. It will greatly improve
      viewing the games with software but it also will make the format
      less readable by humans.

The most important thing is to make the multimedia comments/markups
optional. I imagine not every Shogi game viewer will want the feature
(furthermore I believe some target devices, like simple cell-phones,
won't be able to use it).

I would split the problem of multimedia comments into two categories:

  1. markups that don't require embedding additional data (markups for
     actions that are understand by viewer: drawing arrows, coloring
     board fields, showing hyper link, etc.)

  2. markups that require embedding additional data (pictures, sounds,
     movies, etc.)

The first category is easy. The more I think about the second category
the less I am convinced it belongs to the standard ;-)

And what do you think?

---
H.G.Muller October 15, 2010 at 3:22 AM

I know Shogi people like to do everything as different as possible, but
I like to stick to existing standards as long as they can do the job.
None of the requirements you point out is really any different from what
you need for any other Chess variant, and Portable Game Notation was
designed to meet them.

So in the WinBoard / XBoard graphical interface for Chess / Shogi /
Xiangqi (plus a host of others) I stick to using PGN as a single
standard format, rather than using zillions of different formats of
limited scope.
